---
title: just is the worst word
draft: true
---

the "arc" of justs.

it's just a function? what is a function? it's a textual representation of an
algorithmic procedure.

that sounds pretty general, couldn't that do anything in a turing complete
language which is all of them really kind of I mean except for markup?

well yeah.

that doesn't sound so simple. Wait you said it was a textual representation, or
description. text doesn't do anything by itself, how does that do computer
then?

well it runs in a virtual machine, which interprets the text.

why do we need a virtual machine? we have a real machine right here!

well, this blublang over here is interpreted, so it has to have a runtime. some
languages are compiled.

doesn't this runtime have a jit? so it's compiled... sometimes? when?

I don't know, it depends.

on what?

a bunch of stuff... the architecture, the performance characteristics of the
code, how it's being used as the program runs...

that doesn't sound simple.

you're not listening, it's just a function.

ok so there is a virtual machine interpreting text I'm writing, fine, but
surely the virtual machine runs on a real machine, right?

I mean, most of the time... sure why not. yes.

so what interprets the virtual machine?

oh that's compiled to machine code.

ok so what's machine code?

data

what's data?

numbers, sort of.

what's a number?

go talk to the haskell people, man, what were you even asking me about again?

I'm just trying to understand what a function is... what _this_ function is, is
all. So the virtual machine is compiled code which is run on a real machine and
the code is data which is basically numbers but what is the machine?

it's a bunch of chips and memory and stuff.

what are those.

mostly transistors? nand gates?

what are those?

they're electronic components that, when structured in a very particular way,
allow us to represent discrete boolean values by alternately storing and
redirecting an electrical charge really really quickly.

so that's how we do math? with electricity?

Point
-----

Person A: yeah, it's simple, see? it's just a function.

Person B: so this is a function, which is what... a type of generalized
description of some arbitrary algorithmic procedure, and in this particular
case a textual representation of same in a particular but likewise arbitrary
programming language and syntax, and is in practice here interpreted by a _virtual_
machine, which is itself, a bunch of code and functions and stuff, which is
just data, which is numbers, basically, running on a _real_ machine, which is a
bunch of transistors and chips and hoobledy gock and whatsits that redirect
electricity really quickly in different ways that we read back to get answers
to math problems? So we're just _harnessing lightning to do math?_ That's
amazing!

Person A: yeah, it's really simple, it's _just_ a function.

Counterpoint
-----

Person B: I just don't understand why you are so dismissive. Saying
"it's just a function" completely obscures and minimizes so much.

Person A: Hey look, I'm with you, all right? I have admiration for the triumphs
of modern technology and am suitably filled with similar awe when I take a
moment to sit back and consider the tower of abstractions we've built the
modern world on top of, but the abstractions go all the way down. The only way
we can move forward, ever, or more appropriately to the metaphor, upwards, is
to pick out some point on that tower below which we don't bother with.
Fundamentally, it's a tradeoff. The lower down you go, the more control you
have over everything, but the more work it takes to do anything. The higher up
you go, the more you have to rely on abstractions you had no hand in building,
but they become more and more powerful, and you can do a lot more a lot faster.
You have to sit at the appropriate place on this pile of abstractions, both for
where you are in your understanding and for what is appropriate to the task
you're trying to complete. I'm sorry if I seemed dismissive, I didn't mean it
that way.

Person B: I guess we both have a point.
