---
date: 2014-02-15T00:00:00Z
title: week one
---

So, week one is already over, and it went by pretty quickly.

<iframe src="//instagram.com/p/kUplN5kjDi/embed/" width="612" height="710"
frameborder="0" scrolling="no" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>

Anyway, week in review- what have I learned so far, concretely?

- 'git add -p' for reviewing each and every change you made before committing
it
- 'git commit --amend' for opening up your last commit and making changes to it
- 'Ctrl+R' to search through old CLI commands
- 'diff'
- what a 'trie' is
- what a 'queue' is
- depth-first vs breadth-first search
- that vim doesn't source my .zshrc by default
- state-machine
- void returns in C
- the basics of list comprehensions in Python
- etc etc etc... and on and on and on...


these are just _facts_, and random things, but they are actual tidbits of
knowledge that I actually remember because I learned them 'in the stream,' as
it were.

This is a funny place to be, but it feels really natural... everything you do
here is one hundred percent your own decision. It's incredible to note that
_everyone_ is working _all the time_. The real time chat we use is constantly
on fire with threads about all kinds of arcana from assembly specs to keyboard
reviews to places to eat lunch.

Also, I got to try an [Oculus
Rift](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DhcOMOWRMnA), which was _totally rad_.

The question of what exactly to work on while here is a big one- but there is
certainly no lack of ideas. Every single person I talked to was working on
something interesting, and the huge variance in people's backgrounds virtually
guarantees that you can both learn something from and teach something to anyone
in the room.

I've been going through the last couple of chapters of
[nand2tetris](http://www.nand2tetris.org/) and hope to have the book done in
the next couple of days so that I don't have to think about it anymore. It's
been an _incredible_ learning experience, but I do want to maximize the time
that I spend pairing and shipping while I'm here, and nand feels like it's best
done on one's own and in isolation (at least, that's the way I've enjoyed doing
it... though the toolset that I composed with Ruby is _really, really_ ugly and
could use a refactor really badly!)

More later on specifics... I want to write a booklist of all the things I've
read so far and all the things I hope to read, and hopefully in the next couple
of weeks I'll be able to get some clarity on what exactly I want to work
towards and what I want to learn- or at least narrow the scope of those things
to a manageable point.

Tonight, though, it's my birthday. So I'm trudging out in the cold and getting
some sushi. Had a preemptive small party last weekend with lots of singing and
nerdery, and I'll post some videos from that pretty soon. It's pretty fun to
get a room full of musicians drunk and then play "lets listen to a song once
and then play a fully realized arrangement of it yay lets go GO HARMONY
EVERYWHERE!

<iframe src="//instagram.com/p/kc3pDTEjJs/embed/" width="612" height="710"
frameborder="0" scrolling="no" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>
